;;; -*- Mode:Text -*-

             A Mechanism for Generating Technical Proposals

                                 (David Saslav)

Goals:

1. To expedite the specification, design, implementation, and
documentation of technical projects.

2. To assure that all projects are the product of a sound technical
process, based to the greatest extent possible upon general consensus
amongst the designers.

3. To provide an uncontroversial record of technical discussion, thus
guarding against and helping to quickly rectify any technical
miscommunication, misinterpretation, or misunderstanding which may
occur.

4. To assure that input by each member of the technical staff is given
fair, professional consideration.


Mechanism:

This section describes the steps involved in generating, announcing,
commenting upon, distributing, and voting upon proposals.

  1. WHEN TO WRITE A PROPOSAL

The Proposal process is meant to serve as a means of fostering
discussion and achieving consensus on controversial technical issues,
and should not be used as a substitute for interpersonal discussion.  In
fact, informal discussion amongst staff members should be the primary
means of eliminating controversy.

  2. HOW TO TYPE IN A PROPOSAL OR RESPONSE TO A PROPOSAL

Proposals should be named with a slightly condensed version of the
proposal Title, and saved in the directory "JB:PROPOSALS;".

The proposal format should be similar to that of this file, consisting
of a Title and Author, centered on the first and third lines of the
file.  There should be sections for each Proposal's Technical
Background, its Purpose/Goals, its Mechanism/Implementation, any
Comments, and its Status.

The mechanism/implementation section should outline a general plan for
accomplishing the purpose/goals of the proposal, and should be fully
consistent with the technical background laid out in the Technical
Background section.

The directory "JB:PROPOSALS.BACKGROUND;" exists for those cases in which
the technical background required for presenting a proposal is extensive
enough to warrant separate containment.  In this case, the proposal
Author should leave in the Technical Background section a full pointer
to the file in which the text resides.  A template example of a
recently-completed proposal may be found at the end of this file.

If entering a response to an existing proposal, do so in the Comments
section at the end of the proposal file.  Include the response date and
your initials or name at the beginning of your response, and then write
out a new version of the file.

The last section of each proposal will be the Status section.  The
original Status of a Proposal is always "OPEN". For more details on
Proposal Status, see sections 5. Voting on a Distributed Proposal and 6.
Recording a Proposal's Status.

  3. SEND A BRIEF ANNOUNCEMENT TO THE DESIGN TEAM

Once you have entered the initial proposal, send an announcement
including the Title, Author, and a brief summary of the proposal to all
relevant mailing lists.  This alerts other technical designers to the
existence of the proposal, and enables them to read and comment upon it.

  4. INTEGRATE TECHNICAL RESPONSE INTO THE PROPOSAL

After entering a comment to an existing proposal file, mail a complete
copy of all added text to the Proposal Author.  At this point, it
becomes the Author's responsibility to respond to the comment by mail,
and also to update the Proposal to reflect the results of the ensuing
discussion.  The Responder's original comment text should be left
intact, and a phrase inserted next to the commenter's name indicating
the comment's disposition.

  5. DISTRIBUTE THE PROPOSAL TO THE DESIGN TEAM

The proposal, once submitted, will remain an active document.  The
Status section will contain a phrase describing the current state of the
idea under consideration.  When a proposal's Author believes that the
proposal file contains sufficient information to serve as the basis of a
decision, he may Distribute the Proposal.  Distributing a Proposal
consists of the following three steps, in order:

  A. Notating the proposal file's Status section to read, "DISTRIBUTED";
  B. Notating the entry in the file
     "JB:PROPOSALS;TABLE-OF-CONTENTS.TEXT" such that the Status field
     for the proposal in question reads, "DISTRIBUTED";
  C. Distributing a hardcopy of the entire proposal file to all members
     of the technical design staff on the day before a Proposal Meeting
     has been scheduled.

Proposal Meetings must be announced in writing by means of a ZMail
message to the relevant mailing lists no later than 24 hours before the
scheduled meeting time.

  6. VOTE ON THE PROPOSAL

Each project member will have a chance to record his vote during the
Proposal Meeting.  In the case of an excused absence, a staff member may
cast his vote in absentia.  A 2/3 majority of the entire technical staff
of GigaMos Cambridge constitutes a decisive Vote.  The calling of a Vote
is done by the Project Manager, unless he is also the Proposal's Author,
in which case, the Vote will be called by the Company President.

The possible results of a Proposal Vote are:

   1. Acceptance of the Proposal
   2. Rejection of the Proposal
   3. Deferment of the Proposal for further modification and a future
      voting

The result of all Proposal Votes is Deferment, unless a 2/3 majority
Vote is achieved either Accepting or Rejecting the Proposal.  The
Proposal Administrator is responsible for electronically mailing the
results of all majority Votes taken at Proposal Meetings, during the
same day that the majority Vote was achieved.

Once a Proposal has been Accepted or Rejected, and the Vote results have
been distributed to the staff, the president has 24 hours in which to
Overrule that verdict, either from "Accepted" status to "Rejected"
status, or from "Rejected" status to "Accepted" status.  To do this, a
written explanation must be entered into the Status field at the end of
the Proposal file, immediately after the record of the Overruled Vote
(see the next section for details on recording Proposal Vote Status).

Once a Proposal has been accepted without Overruling, it then becomes
the responsibility of management to make any necessary modifications to
the project plan, and inform staff members of the plans for
implementation and the timetable of the change in a timely manner,

  7. RECORDING A PROPOSAL'S STATUS

Proposals which have been Accepted or Rejected will be considered
closed; Proposals which are neither Accepted nor Rejected will remain
open.  All proposals remaining open remain the responsibility of the
Author, until such time as sufficient new modifications exist to warrant
another Proposal Distribution.

Files containing Proposals which have been either Accepted or Rejected
should have their Status fields modified by the Project Manager to read

 "CLOSED -- [decision]"

 where [decision] summarizes the intent and count of the majority Vote
 (either "Accepted" or "Rejected").

  8. STORING, FINDING, AND MOVING PROPOSALS

There is one relevant top-level directory, and three relevant
subdirectories beneath it:

   Directory "JB:PROPOSALS;"
     Subdirectory "JB:PROPOSALS.ACCEPTED"
     Subdirectory "JB:PROPOSALS.ARCHIVE"
     Subdirectory "JB:PROPOSALS.BACKGROUND"

While being fleshed out, Proposals are kept at the top level of the
directory "JB:PROPOSALS;", with mnemonic names.

Proposals that have been Rejected are deleted from the top level
directory and placed in the subdirectory "JB:PROPOSALS.ARCHIVE;",
retaining the same filename from before, while being kept in the top
level directory.

Proposals that have been Accepted are deleted from "JB:PROPOSALS;" and
placed in the subdirectory "JB:PROPOSALS.ACCEPTED;" for further
processing.  Accepted Proposals become the input for a new process, the
goal of which is to generate Project Specifications for imminent
distribution.

As discussed above, the subdirectory "JB:PROPOSALS.BACKGROUND" is to be
used for extensive discussions of technical details used as background
for a proposal's more formally action-oriented content.

All versions of a proposal are kept together in the relevant directory
at all times.

To assist in finding a given proposal, the Proposal Administrator will
be responsible for maintaining the file,

 "JB:PROPOSALS;TABLE-OF-CONTENTS.TEXT"

This file will contain relevant information about each proposal [Title,
Author, Proposal Filename, Status, and Last Proposal File Modifier].

Comments:

-------- [K. Corbett 20-oct-88]
I would/will vote in favor of the revised proposal mechanism, in its
current form.

One suggestion: make a TECHNICAL-INFO (or equivalent) mailing list.  I
don't think any one mailing list consists of only the internal (GigaMos
Cambridge) technical staff.  There should be one, and the proposal
mechanism should specify it as the appropriate list for proposal mail.



From the fictitious file "JB:PROPOSALS;END-ALL-WAR":

;;; -*- Mode:Text; Fonts:(HL12 HL12B HL12I) -*-

                               Ending War

                (Draft Last Revised 2/31/88 -- John Doe)

Background:

See the file "JB:PROPOSALS.BACKGROUND;HISTORY-OF-WAR.TEXT" for a
detailed account of all wars throughout history.

Goals:

To construct a mechanism which ensures that no war ever take place
again.

Mechanism:

  1. Kill all the lawyers.

        :
        :
        :


Comments:

-------- [Jane Doe 24-Oct-88:] [Proposal modified to reflect this -JD]

"Kill all the lawyers" should come before step 7.  In fact, it should be
the first thing you do.


Status:

CLOSED,
ACCEPTED BY 7-1 (C.O.M.P. sole dissenter) -- P. R. Oject-Manager
_______________________________________________________________________
|DECISION OVERRULED: PROPOSAL REJECTED
|
|      First of all,...
|       :
|       :
|      Secondly,...
|       :
|       :
|      On the other hand,
|       :
|       :
|      Last, but not least, I overruled this Proposal because I am a
| lawyer in my spare time.
|                                              --C. O.  Mpany-President
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
