

To:     WARD  MACKENZIE

From:   DAVE GOODINE

Cc:     DAN THOMAS

Subject: Customer Software Support

Date:   October 22, 1985




        After talking to several members of the Software Support group
in Customer Service and gaining a greater understanding of the Lambda
software environment during the last two years, I have become aware of
several problems that currently limit the effectiveness of LMI's support
of the customer's software needs.  I have closely analyzed these
problems and considered possible solutions.  The enclosed proposal will
solve these problems and offer LMI the best possible growth in software
support.  This plan has the support of the majority of the Engineering
software and interdisciplinary staff along with members of the current
Software Support Group.

        I would appreciate your prompt consideration of this proposal,
as it may have a noticeable effect on the success of the pending software
release.


   PROPOSAL FOR THE FORMATION OF A SOFTWARE RELEASE AND SUPPORT GROUP

                          David M. Goodine Jr.






        The following is a proposal to form a Software Release and
Support group as part of Engineering from the existing Software Support
group in the Customer Service division and the current Software Release
group in Engineering.  As LMI is a growing company, with increasing
responsibility for the support if its customers, it has become evident
that we must likewise increase the resources and efficiency of both the
release and support functions.  The current Software Support group is
encountering obstacles which are impeding their progress toward a better
scheme for supporting the needs of the customer.  The current Release
group simply suffers from a lack of manpower.  Solutions for both of
these problems are provided by this proposal, along with promised growth
for LMI by more effectively and efficiently addressing the software
needs of the customer.


                  NEEDS FOR EFFECTIVE SOFTWARE SUPPORT




1) Qualifications of the support personnel:

        The personnel in this group must be knowledgable about the
workings of the system in order to formulate reasonable bug reports and
help the user interactively with bugs that constitute a barrier to the
productivity of the customer.


2) Engineering as a source of Education:

        The experience which qualifies someone for a support position
depends on communication with engineering on technical issues.  A fast
and reliable means of passing not only technical information but
knowledge about the system is of paramount importance.


3) Ability to support future releases:

        In order to make the transition as smooth as possible during a
release, the software support group should continually track development
of the system.


4) Feedback of general design problems with software:

        As the group follows the development of software, they should
offer feedback on functionality and usability of the software which
would originate from the members of the group and the customer.


5) Ability to improve support:

        The group should be able to continually increase support of the
system software by improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its
operations.


6) Stimulating environment for members of the group:

        Members of the group require a rewarding and technically
stimulating environment in order to be productive in solving the
problems of the customer.



     THE PROPOSAL: AN ENGINEERING SOFTWARE RELEASE AND SUPPORT GROUP


        The justifications for combining the the release and support
functions for software under Engineering are the following:


Software Support as an Engineering Function:

        The integration of Software Support into Engineering will
greatly improve the effectiveness of the function in the following ways:

        1) providing an environment in which the support people
           can develop expertise in fixing bugs and programming in
           general

        2) improving communications with engineers that can fix
           more difficult bugs and inherent design problems

        3) insuring better communication of customer feedback to
           engineers for future designs of the system


Software Support beyond bugs:

        As the members of the Software Support group develop expertise
with the system, they will be able to help customers better understand
the system and how to solve their particular problem.  This will not
only improve customer relations in a direct way, but it will also
strengthen our market position as a supplier of problem solving tools.
The physical separation of Engineering from Software Support severely
limits the levels of support that can be provided to the customer.


Interfacing to Field Service:

        This scheme will greatly improve the effectiveness of Field
Service by improving the documentation of known software problems and
creating field available diagnostics that will allow the service person
to more reliably determine the cause of a machine crash.  Also the
members of the group will be of more assistance to the field engineer
since they will be more able to debug problems over the phone.  This
group can also improve field diagnosis by developing a course in
collaboration with Education to teach the service people the basics
necessary to debug problems in the field that may be software related.


Interrelation of Release and Support:

        There is an obvious redundancy within these functions.  Two
areas of concern of software support are making sure that bugs are fixed
for future releases and assuring that the system will evolve according
to the customer's needs, both of which are also concerns for the
software release group.  Not only would this proposal eliminate the
redundancy of concerns, but it would allow the combined group the
ability to actually fix some of the bugs and affect the changes that the
customer needs by integrating the support group into the sofware
development effort.


Conservation of manpower and resources:

        The integration of the new group into Engineering will allow
more effective support of the customer with less manpower and resources
which are consumed by redundant work and the inefficiency of
communication that the separation presents.


        This plan offers a growth in the efficiency and effectiveness of
software support in the following ways:


Improvement in bug fixing turnaround:

        Having the Release/Support group investigate and fix bugs will
improve the responsiveness to customers tremendously.  And an
experienced support person will be able to track down problems more
easily and offer immediate solutions to the customer.  Developing the
ability for LMI to identify a bug, find the appropriate fix and release
this fix customers within a matter of hours will put us far ahead of our
competetors in the software support area.


An enriching environment for its members:

        As the members of the group improve their understanding of the
internals of the system, they become a valuable information and manpower
resource to the software development effort in their ability to provide
insight from the technical and customer points of view.  And integrating
the group with Engineering will allow them to help design and code the
new systems.

         INITIAL PLAN FOR THE SOFTWARE RELEASE AND SUPPORT GROUP


        Note: This is only a rough draft composed by the author of this
              proposal.


Resource requirements: (immediate)

        1) One 2x2 plus with landscape monitors and Z29
        2) Two offices
        3) Typical support services and supplies


Resource requirements: (eventual  - (within 4 months))

        1) Administrative support (partial)
        2) Two inexperienced trainees
        3) A full time unix support person
        4) An additional 2x2+ (same configuration)
        5) One 515mb CDC drive (non-removable) to upgrade first machine
        6) One each of every peripheral to be supported
        7) Plenty of magtapes
        8) Full direct mailing (Fed. Ex.) capability for tapes


Step by step plan:


1) Establish communications with Customer Service:
        This will involve at least one person in Customer Service to act
        as an interface.

2) Set up communications with Customers:
        Install Watts line for software support at Cambridge facility
        and contact all customers (by phone and letter).

3) Move current Software Support Group to Engineering in Cambridge:
        The move date will be highly dependent upon existence of the
        immediate resource requirements.  Prompt implementation of this
        plan will allow the group to contribute to the 2.1 release,
        improving its quality and allowing us to get a better start
        on supporting the system.

4) Bring group back up to speed:
        Depending on when the proposal is accepted, this may be
        during or after the pending software release.  The next step
        will not be taken until full support at previous levels has been
        attained.

5) Assess problems and forge new plans for growth: (quarterly)
        An assessment of the current problems encountered by the group,
        including feedback from other departments, will be crucial to
        planning for the next quarter.  The resultant plans will be a
        product of input and consensus of every member of the group.
        The aspects of the group's future to be determined will include:

        - structure and operation of the group
        - breakdown of expected growth into incremental goals
        - task priority assignments
        - personal responsibility assignments
        - assessment of support software needed
        - additional resources and manpower requirements

        After the plans are completed by the group, a quarterly progress
        report and the new plans will be submitted to Engineering for
        approval.

6) Careful implementation of the quarterly plans.


The financial logistics of this operation are yet to be determined,
though I feel that with a fair Software Maintenance Contract this group
should be self sufficient.
